README.md, before:

# SARC/BYML Packager and Merger

This project is part of [TKMM](https://github.com/tkmm-team) and is used as part of the mod manager's functionality. 
It can also be used standalone if need be, using the instructions below.

## What does the tool do?

`SarcTool` has three modes of operation: `assemble`, `package` and `merge`:

- The `assemble` mode places all flat files that are originally included in the vanilla version
of the game into their respective original archives. This is useful if you develop a mod without
placing the files into their associated archive.
  > **It's recommended you run this step before packaging the mod.** 
  > If you don't, you will find that a proper change log will not be generated for your flat files, 
  > causing mod conflicts. 
  
- The `package` mode examines all SARC archives inside and removes any duplicated assets
that have not been modified from their vanilla versions. This reduces the size of a mod and
prevents conflicts where the author did not intend to modify an asset.


- The `merge` mode accepts multiple mod folders and will combine all of the assets inside of
all included SARC archives, based on priority. For example, if two mods provide the
the same package file, `SarcTool` will evaluate its contents and smartly combine its contents. 
It will, for example, merge `.byml` files together, attempting to combine modified values
from each mod. In cases where this kind of merging is not possible, `SarcTool` will replace the
file with the one provided by a mod that has higher priority.

## How to use the tool

### For assembling flat files
`SarcTool.exe assemble --mod [mod] --output [output]`

- `mod`: The path to the mod folder you would like to assemble files for
- `output`: The path to the destination folder you would like the assembled files to be written to.

Example:
```
SarcTool.exe assemble --mod "C:\My Mods\My Great Mod Folder" --output "C:\My Mods\combined\My Great Mod"
```

```
Usage:
  TKMM.SarcTool assemble [options]

Options:
  --mod <mod> (REQUIRED)        Path to the mod to perform the assembly on
  --output <output> (REQUIRED)  Merged mods output directory
  --config <config>             Path to the TKMM configuration files (config.json). Default if not specified.
  --verbose                     Enable verbose output
  -?, -h, --help                Show help and usage information
```

> **Note**: The first time you run `assemble`, SarcTool will build a database of files inside the archives. If you
> update your game's version, you should delete the `archivemappings.bin` file in the TKMM configuration folder
> (typically in `%localappdata%\totk` on Windows) to allow SarcTool to regenerate the database, otherwise the assembly
> function will not work as intended.

### For packaging archives
`SarcTool.exe package --mod [mod] --output [output]`

- `mod`: The path to the mod folder you would like to package up
- `output`: The path to the destination folder you would like the packaged mod to be written to.

Example:
```
SarcTool.exe package --mod "C:\My Mods\My Great Mod Folder" --output "C:\My Mods\combined\My Great Mod"
```

Some optional parameters exist. Here is the full help, which can be accessed any time by running the tool
without the required parameters:

```
Usage:
  TKMM.SarcTool package [options]

Options:
  --mod <mod> (REQUIRED)        Path to the mod to perform the packaging on
  --output <output> (REQUIRED)  Merged mods output directory
  --config <config>             Path to the TKMM config json. Default if not specified.
  --checksum <checksum>         Path to the TKMM checksum database. Default if not specified.
  --versions <versions>         Versions to try and package against [default: 100|110|111|120|121]
  --verbose                     Enable verbose output
  -?, -h, --help                Show help and usage information

```

### For merging archives
`SarcTool.exe merge --mods [modlist] --base [base] --output [output]`

- `base`: The path to the folder that holds all of your mods
- `modlist`: A list of mod folders inside of `base` to merge together, listed in priority (mods listed first have higher priority).
Higher priority mods will overwrite conflicting options of lower priority mods.
- `output`: The path to the destination folder you would like the merged mod files to be written to.

Example: 

```
SarcTool.exe merge --base "C:\My Mods" --mods "My Great Mod" "Another Great Mod" --output "C:\My Mods\combined"
```

Some optional parameters exist. Here is the full help, which can be accessed any time by running the tool
without the required parameters:

```
Usage:
  TKMM.SarcTool merge [options]

Options:
  --base <base> (REQUIRED)      The base folder path containing the mod subfolders
  --mods <mods> (REQUIRED)      A list of mod folder names, within the base mod folder, to merge, in order of priority
  --output <output> (REQUIRED)  Merged mods output directory
  --config <config>             Path to the TKMM config json. Default if not specified.
  --process <All|Archive|Flat>  Specify what type of merge to perform
  --verbose                     Enable verbose output
  -?, -h, --help                Show help and usage information
```

## Plugins

Smart merging is supported by handlers defined in plugins. 

Currently, we officially support the merging
of `.byml` and `.bgyml` files with the included BYML plugin. You can write your own plugins to support additional
file formats, and SarcTool will load your plugin as long as its DLL is in the same folder as the executable, and is named
appropriately. See below for more information about writing your own plugins.

### Listing Available Plugins

Running SarcTool with the `showplugins` command will show a list of valid, loadable plugins and their supported
formats. If your custom plugin is not shown when running this command, it will not be used by SarcTool to process
your file type.

### Creating a Custom Plugin

Create a new C# class library and add a reference to `TKMM.SarcTool.Common`. 

A plugin consists of two parts: the plugin definition and the handler. First, create a new class that derives from
`SarcPlugin` and implement the required properties. Next, create a new handler class that implements `ISarcFileHandler`.
This file handler performs all of the operations and returns the merged version of the file to SarcTool.

Take a look at the included BYML Plugin for an example implementation.

In order to ensure your plugin is loaded, make sure your DLL is in the same directory as the SarcTool executable. Its
name must also start with `TKMM.SarcTool.Plugin` (for example, `TKMM.SarcTool.Plugin.Byml.dll`). If you run the
`showplugins` command on the SarcTool executable and your plugin is listed, it will be used when processing files 
that are in the format(s) you support.

Commit message:

Remove output option from assemble.

README.md, after:

# SARC/BYML Packager and Merger

This project is part of [TKMM](https://github.com/tkmm-team) and is used as part of the mod manager's functionality. 
It can also be used standalone if need be, using the instructions below.

## What does the tool do?

`SarcTool` has three modes of operation: `assemble`, `package` and `merge`:

- The `assemble` mode places all flat files that are originally included inside of archives in the vanilla version
of the game back into their respective original archives. This is useful if you develop a mod without
placing the files into their associated archive.
  > **It's recommended you run this step before packaging the mod.** 
  > If you don't, you will find that a proper change log will not be generated for your flat files, 
  > causing mod conflicts. 
  
- The `package` mode examines all SARC archives and removes any duplicated assets within
that have not been modified from their vanilla versions. This reduces the size of a mod and
prevents conflicts where the author did not intend to modify an asset. Packaging also
compares loose `byml` or `bgyml` files with their vanilla versions and creates a special
copy of the file that contains only the changes.


- The `merge` mode accepts multiple mod folders and will combine all of the assets inside of
all included SARC archives, based on priority. For example, if two mods provide the
the same package file, `SarcTool` will evaluate its contents and smartly combine its contents. 
It will, for example, merge `.byml` files together, attempting to combine modified values
from each mod. In cases where this kind of merging is not possible, `SarcTool` will replace the
file with the one provided by a mod that has higher priority.

## How to use the tool

### For assembling flat files

`SarcTool.exe assemble --mod [mod]`

- `mod`: The path to the mod folder you would like to assemble flat files in.

> **IMPORTANT**
>
> The `assemble` command will overwrite files in your mod folder. Please make sure you are working on a copy
> of everything in case you need to roll back the changes made.

Example:
```
SarcTool.exe assemble --mod "C:\My Mods\My Great Mod Folder"
```

```
Usage:
  TKMM.SarcTool assemble [options]

Options:
  --mod <mod> (REQUIRED)        Path to the mod to perform the assembly on
  --config <config>             Path to the TKMM configuration files (config.json). Default if not specified.
  --verbose                     Enable verbose output
  -?, -h, --help                Show help and usage information
```

> **Note**: The first time you run `assemble`, SarcTool will build a database of files inside the archives. If you
> update your game's version, you should delete the `archivemappings.bin` file in the TKMM configuration folder
> (typically in `%localappdata%\totk` on Windows) to allow SarcTool to regenerate the database, otherwise the assembly
> function will not work as intended.

### For packaging archives
`SarcTool.exe package --mod [mod] --output [output]`

- `mod`: The path to the mod folder you would like to package up
- `output`: The path to the destination folder you would like the packaged mod to be written to.

Example:
```
SarcTool.exe package --mod "C:\My Mods\My Great Mod Folder" --output "C:\My Mods\combined\My Great Mod"
```

Some optional parameters exist. Here is the full help, which can be accessed any time by running the tool
without the required parameters:

```
Usage:
  TKMM.SarcTool package [options]

Options:
  --mod <mod> (REQUIRED)        Path to the mod to perform the packaging on
  --output <output> (REQUIRED)  Merged mods output directory
  --config <config>             Path to the TKMM config json. Default if not specified.
  --checksum <checksum>         Path to the TKMM checksum database. Default if not specified.
  --versions <versions>         Versions to try and package against [default: 100|110|111|120|121]
  --verbose                     Enable verbose output
  -?, -h, --help                Show help and usage information

```

### For merging archives
`SarcTool.exe merge --mods [modlist] --base [base] --output [output]`

- `base`: The path to the folder that holds all of your mods
- `modlist`: A list of mod folders inside of `base` to merge together, listed in priority (mods listed first have higher priority).
Higher priority mods will overwrite conflicting options of lower priority mods.
- `output`: The path to the destination folder you would like the merged mod files to be written to.

Example: 

```
SarcTool.exe merge --base "C:\My Mods" --mods "My Great Mod" "Another Great Mod" --output "C:\My Mods\combined"
```

Some optional parameters exist. Here is the full help, which can be accessed any time by running the tool
without the required parameters:

```
Usage:
  TKMM.SarcTool merge [options]

Options:
  --base <base> (REQUIRED)      The base folder path containing the mod subfolders
  --mods <mods> (REQUIRED)      A list of mod folder names, within the base mod folder, to merge, in order of priority
  --output <output> (REQUIRED)  Merged mods output directory
  --config <config>             Path to the TKMM config json. Default if not specified.
  --process <All|Archive|Flat>  Specify what type of merge to perform
  --verbose                     Enable verbose output
  -?, -h, --help                Show help and usage information
```

## Plugins

Smart merging is supported by handlers defined in plugins. 

Currently, we officially support the merging
of `.byml` and `.bgyml` files with the included BYML plugin. You can write your own plugins to support additional
file formats, and SarcTool will load your plugin as long as its DLL is in the same folder as the executable, and is named
appropriately. See below for more information about writing your own plugins.

### Listing Available Plugins

Running SarcTool with the `showplugins` command will show a list of valid, loadable plugins and their supported
formats. If your custom plugin is not shown when running this command, it will not be used by SarcTool to process
your file type.

### Creating a Custom Plugin

Create a new C# class library and add a reference to `TKMM.SarcTool.Common`. 

A plugin consists of two parts: the plugin definition and the handler. First, create a new class that derives from
`SarcPlugin` and implement the required properties. Next, create a new handler class that implements `ISarcFileHandler`.
This file handler performs all of the operations and returns the merged version of the file to SarcTool.

Take a look at the included BYML Plugin for an example implementation.

In order to ensure your plugin is loaded, make sure your DLL is in the same directory as the SarcTool executable. Its
name must also start with `TKMM.SarcTool.Plugin` (for example, `TKMM.SarcTool.Plugin.Byml.dll`). If you run the
`showplugins` command on the SarcTool executable and your plugin is listed, it will be used when processing files 
that are in the format(s) you support.
